## 4 Hepatobiliary Diseases

## Mark Danta, Arthur Y Kim

## Key features

- Hepatobiliary abnormalities are common in resource limited and tropical settings
- Liver disease can be divided into: 'pre-hepatic', involving the portal vein or hepatic artery; 'hepatic', involving the parenchymal lobule, including hepatocytes, biliary and vascular sinusoids; and 'post-hepatic', involving the hepatic vein or biliary systems
- Characterizing liver abnormalities involves a combination of clinical, biochemical, serologic, microbiologic, radiologic and histologic investigations
- Hepatitis is common, and most frequently due to viral infections and toxins
- Parasitic infection of the liver may be seen during echinococcosis, schistosomiasis and liver *uke infection, among other processes
- Many tropical diseases may result in cholestasis and jaundice, through varied mechanisms
- Focal liver diseases may be due to infection or neoplasia
- Hepatitis B and hepatitis C can lead to chronic liver disease, especially in setting of HIV co-infection
- Chronic liver disease can lead to cirrhosis, liver failure, and cancer

## INTRODUCTION

Given the prevalence of hepatotropic infections and the exposure of the liver to gastrointestinal organisms and toxins, it is not surprising that many tropical diseases manifest primarily in the liver. Acute and chronic diseases of the hepatobiliary system pose major threats to the health of people living within, and travelers to, endemic regions. This chapter provides a framework to approach common presentations of liver  diseases  in  the  tropics.  Each  primary  clinical  presentation  is discussed with emphasis on differential diagnosis; for individual conditions, the reader is referred to the specific chapter.

## APPROACH TO LIVER DISEASE

The liver has a great capacity to regenerate; however, hepatic dysfunction  and  failure,  which  usually  occurs  in  the  context  of  cirrhosis, carries a poor prognosis. Specific etiologic agents cause a variety of liver  injuries.  The  functional  unit  of  the  liver  is  the  hepatic  lobule. Blood enters from either the portal (70%) or systemic (30%) circulation, flowing across the liver sinusoids to the central vein and then back  to  the  heart  via  the  hepatic  veins.  The  hepatocyte  microvilli, which project basally into the perisinusoidal space and apically into the bile canaliculi, actively secrete and absorb fluids and solutes. The liver is integrally involved in the synthesis of proteins, metabolism of amino acids, fat  and  carbohydrate, and the detoxification of  many compounds; receiving blood from the intestine, spleen and pancreas via the portal circulation. As a result, the liver is exposed to numerous potential infective and toxic pathogens from the gastrointestinal tract, particularly in the tropics and developing world. Hepatic infections most  commonly spread to  the  liver  hematogenously,  but  can  also ascend via the biliary tract. Gastrointestinal organisms enter the liver via  the  portal  circulation  or  biliary  tract,  and  include  pathogenic ameba, enteric bacteria, hydatids, liver flukes (Fasciola, Opisthorchis and Clonorchis) and schistosomes. Systemic infections seed the liver via  the  hepatic  artery  and  include Mycobacterium  tuberculosis (TB), Burkholderia  pseudomallei (the  cause  of  melioidosis),  syphilis  and fungal infections.

The spectrum of liver disease varies from asymptomatic liver lesions and abnormalities detected on routine blood tests to hepatic failure. Chronic inflammation and subsequent hepatic fibrosis can lead to cirrhosis, characterized by the formation of fibrous tissue and regenerative nodules in the liver that disrupt hepatocyte and biliary function,  and  obstruct  flow  through  canaliculi  and  sinusoids.  These histologic changes result in the clinical manifestations of liver disease. Acute and chronic liver failure are defined by the inability of the liver to maintain normal metabolic and synthetic function [1] with manifestations  that  include  hyperbilirubinemia  (leading  to  jaundice), coagulopathy  (leading  to  bleeding),  increased  nitrogenous  waste products (associated with  encephalopathy), and hypoalbuminemia (contributing to edema and ascites). Vascular obstructions that affect sinusoidal blood flow can lead to portal hypertension, which itself then contributes to ascites and formation of varices [2].

The evaluation of the liver should determine the site of hepatic injury, the underlying etiology and the severity of the liver disease. Conceptually,  liver  disease  can  be  divided  into:  'pre-hepatic',  involving  the portal  vein  or  hepatic  artery;  'hepatic',  involving  the  parenchymal lobule,  including  hepatocytes,  biliary  and  vascular  sinusoids;  and 'post-hepatic', involving the hepatic vein or biliary systems. Characterizing  liver  abnormalities  may  involve  a  combination  of  clinical, biochemical,  serologic, microbiologic, radiologic and  histologic investigations. These evaluations should be refined by knowledge of the geographic distribution of each condition, and understanding of risk  factors  for  each  disease.  Evaluation  should  include  a  detailed history encompassing a review of symptoms (including right upper quadrant pain or discomfort, anorexia, jaundice, darkened urine, pruritus, fever), underlying conditions, past vaccination history and epidemiologic exposures (including exposures to water, food, blood and animals,  and  sexual  practices).  Examination  should  include  assessment of signs  and  findings  consistent  with  liver  disease,  including jaundice, occurrence of smooth-surfaced white spots or patches under the nails  (leukonychia), palmar erythema, spider nevi and gynecomastia. Hepatomegaly can be associated with most causes of hepatitis and liver lesions, while splenomegaly in the context of liver disease represents  either  portal  hypertension  or  an  underlying  cause,  such as malaria.

The inaccurately termed 'liver function tests' can be used to refine the site of liver disease (Fig. 4.1). Bilirubin is a breakdown product of

FIGURE 4.1 The initial screening tests for hepatic injury are 'liver function tests' , which are abnormal in a variety of tropical conditions. Abbreviations include: ALT, alanine aminotransferase (also termed SGPT or serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase); AST, aspartate aminotransferase (also termed SGOT or serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase); ALP, alkaline phosphatase; GGT, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase. When jaundiced, the total bilirubin should be fractionated into unconjugated (also termed 'indirect') and conjugated (also termed 'direct'). Imaging is an important diagnostic tool to look for both biliary  dilation  and  mass  lesions  (see  Table  4-3)  and  to  assess  hepatic  vasculature,  with  ultrasound  more  available  in  resource-limited  settings  than computed tomography. ERCP, or endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography and MRCP, or magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography, are useful for assessment of biliary disease.

<!-- image -->

hemoglobin which is  conjugated  by  the  liver.  Elevation  can  result from an increased load (pre-hepatic), reduced hepatic conjugation or transport,  or  post-hepatic  biliary  obstruction.  Elevation  of  hepatic cytosolic  alanine  aminotransferase  (ALT)  and  mitochondrial  aspartate aminotransferase (AST) indicates parenchymal inflammation and hepatocyte injury. In contrast, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), lining the hepatic canalicular membrane, and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), expressed on the epithelium of the bile ducts, are cholestatic enzymes  that  increase  in  biliary  disease.  However,  alkaline  phosphatase  also  increases  in  some  parenchymal  and  granulomatous disease, while GGT can also be elevated following injury mediated by alcohol  and  drugs,  such  as  phenytoin.  Using  these  biochemical markers,  however,  patterns  of  liver  injury  can  be  characterized  as hepatocellular (ALT/AST), cholestatic (ALP/GGT), or mixed. The true functional tests of hepatic function include assessing blood levels of albumin,  bilirubin  and  coagulation  factors.  Thrombocytopenia  in chronic liver disease is often secondary to portal hypertension. In the tropics,  peripheral  blood  eosinophilia  can  be  useful  in  suggesting certain parasitic infections. Based on clinical and blood parameters, two  scoring  systems  exist  that  relate  the  severity  of  chronic  liver disease and prognosis: the Childs Pugh classification and the Model for End-stage Liver Disease (MELD) score [3] (Table 4-1).

The primary approach to the differential diagnosis depends on the results of the initial examination and laboratory testing as outlined in Figure  4.1. Further investigations  may include  a hepatitis  screen and imaging. A hepatitis screen usually includes viral serologies (hepatitis A, B and C), immune serologies (including antinuclear antibody [ANA], antimitochondrial antibody [AMA] and anti-smooth muscle antibody),  and  metabolic  markers  such  as  iron  or  copper  studies. Applicability of tests will depend on local resources and prevalence of  specific  conditions.  An  ultrasound  is  a  useful,  usually  accessible investigation that can identify parenchymal and biliary disease and cirrhosis. It may also detect evidence of portal hypertension, including reversal of portal vein flow and splenomegaly. More detailed investigations include computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for parenchymal and vascular disease, and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) for biliary disease. Finally, liver biopsy may be required for definitive diagnosis and staging of disease [4].

## HEPATITIS AND JAUNDICE 8Table 4-2 AND Fig. 4.19

## ACUTE HEPATITIS

Acute hepatitis can be defined as any syndrome that causes elevation of  liver  function  tests  (LFTs)  for  less  than  6  months.  This  can  be caused by a variety of infections, toxin/drug exposures, or metabolic

| TABLE 4-1 ModiIed Childs-Pugh ClassiIcation     | TABLE 4-1 ModiIed Childs-Pugh ClassiIcation   | TABLE 4-1 ModiIed Childs-Pugh ClassiIcation   | TABLE 4-1 ModiIed Childs-Pugh ClassiIcation   |
|-------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| Parameter                                       | Points assigned                               | Points assigned                               | Points assigned                               |
|                                                 | 1                                             | 2                                             | 3                                             |
| Ascites                                         | Absent                                        | Slight                                        | Moderate                                      |
| Bilirrubin, mg/dL                               | < / = 2                                       | 2-3                                           | > 3                                           |
| Albumin, g/dL                                   | > 3.5                                         | 2.8-3.5                                       | < 2.8                                         |
| Prothrombin time                                |                                               |                                               |                                               |
| * Seconds over control                          | 1-3                                           | 4-6                                           | > 6                                           |
| * INR                                           | < 1.8                                         | 1.8-2.3                                       | > 2.3                                         |
| Encephalopathy                                  | None                                          | Grade 1-2                                     | Grade 3-4                                     |
| Grade                                           | Points                                        | One-year patient survival (%)                 | Two-year patient survival (%)                 |
| A (total 5-6): well-compensated disease         | 5-6                                           | 100                                           | 85                                            |
| B (total 7-9): signiIcant functional compromise | 7-9                                           | 80                                            | 60                                            |
| C (total 10-15): decompensated disease          | 10-15                                         | 45                                            | 35                                            |

diseases,  often  with  a  typical  hepatocellular,  cholestatic,  or  mixed picture  on  LFTs.  A  variety  of  viruses,  bacteria  and  other  organisms can cause  an  acute  elevation  in  liver  enzymes,  either  due  to  direct infection (as in the viral hepatitides), or indirectly as a response to systemic infection (e.g. during sepsis, malaria, typhoid fever). These and other common toxins and drugs that commonly cause hepatitis are summarized in Table 4-2. Since distinguishing causality by clinical presentation alone is difficult, knowledge of the geographic distribution  of  infections  and  a  history  eliciting  particular  risk  factors  are critical in determining the likelihood of each entity and guiding evaluation and treatment.

Hepatitis A virus (HAV), a non-enveloped RNA virus in the picornavirus family, is the most common cause of viral hepatitis worldwide. HAV infection is transmitted by the fecal-oral route and in the developing world often occurs in the first years of life. HAV infection is usually asymptomatic when acquired in childhood and confers lifelong immunity. In adults, acute HAV is more likely to cause symptomatic  illness,  including  prolonged  jaundice  with  cholestasis  and, rarely, fulminant hepatitis and liver failure, especially with older age. Tender hepatomegaly and splenomegaly may be present on physical examination. Overall, recovery and lack of sequelae are the outcomes in the vast majority of cases, especially among young children. Due to the unlikelihood of exposure that would generate natural immunity in many people in the developed world, HAV remains a significant  risk  to  travelers  from  low-prevalence  countries.  Proper  use  of pooled  immunoglobulin  and  inactivated  hepatitis  A  vaccine  can reduce the risk of acute infection significantly, and may be used for post-exposure  prophylaxis  [5];  restricting  food  preparation  among infected individuals is also important to prevent further household transmission.

Hepatitis E virus (HEV), a calicivirus, is another virus that also has a fecal-oral route of transmission. HEV has a more localized distribution than HAV (Mexico, Asia, Africa and the Middle East), and should be considered in people living in areas with outbreaks or in travelers returning  from those countries [6]. Most cases are self-limited,  but fulminant hepatitis can occur, with overall mortality rates of about 0.5-4%.  Pregnancy  is  a  risk  factor  for  severe  HEV  infection,  with mortality as high as 20% if acquired during the third trimester. Diagnoses of both HAV and HEV rely on detection of specific IgM antibodies from sera (see Chapter 31).

In  contrast,  hepatitis  B  virus  (HBV)  and  hepatitis  C  virus  (HCV) are  transmitted  primarily  through  parenteral,  sexual  or  perinatal exposure. In high-prevalence areas, HBV is primarily transmitted by vertical exposure from mother to child, and acute congenital infection is  often  asymptomatic  with  higher  rates  of  chronicity  (90%)  than infections  acquired  later  in  life  [7].  This  course  contrasts  with  the clinical  outcome  of  HBV  acquired  during  adulthood,  generally through parenteral or sexual exposures. In this latter setting, symptomatic hepatitis is more prevalent along with spontaneous clearance of the virus (HBsAb positive with clearance of HBsAg). Thus, travelers or  expatriates  are  at  greater  risk  for  acute  HBV  via  occupational exposures  (contact  with  blood),  nosocomial  exposures  (contact with contaminated needles or medical equipment) or unprotected sexual contacts. Recombinant vaccines, immunoglobulin for neonates, universal precautions and safer sex are key to preventing HBV infection. Superinfection with hepatitis D virus (HDV) requires coexisting HBV infection and is generally transmitted  by parenteral exposure. Diagnosis of acute HBV can be made by detection of surface antigen (HBsAg) and, more specifically for the acute stage, made by detection of IgM against the core protein (anti-HBc-IgM).

HCV is most efficiently transmitted via the parenteral route and in the  majority  (~75%)  of  infected  people  causes  a  lifelong  chronic infection [8]. HCV is endemic throughout the world, but some countries and regions have a higher prevalence (e.g. Egypt has a prevalence of &gt; 10%), the epidemic amplified due to previous unsafe injection practices. Most acute infections are asymptomatic and thus do not come to medical attention, but acute symptomatic hepatitis with or without jaundice may occur. Fulminant hepatitis and mortality due to acute HCV is very rare; however, chronic liver disease that develops over decades is a major cause of morbidity and mortality. There is no approved prophylactic HCV vaccine. Diagnosis of acute HCV may be difficult, but ideally made by documentation of seroconversion and/ or the presence of HCV RNA via molecular testing techniques in the presence of negative antibody.

Other tropical viral infections that affect the liver include vector-borne causes such as yellow fever, where hepatic necrosis may accompany up to 20% of cases (see Chapter 33.1) and dengue fever (see Chapter 32.1). A variety of viral hemorrhagic fevers may also involve the liver; some of these viruses (e.g. Lassa fever, Ebola virus; see Chapters 33.2 and 33.4) may require strict isolation precautions, if suspected. Herpesviruses not specific to the tropics (particularly cytomegalovirus and Epstein-Barr virus which can also cause splenomegaly) can also affect the liver.

Elevation of transaminases can occur during various systemic infections,  including  sepsis.  Specific  bacterial  causes  of  acute  hepatitis include spirochetal illness such as leptospirosis and relapsing fever, or syndromes caused by Gram-negative bacteria such as melioidosis, typhoid  fever  and  tularemia,  as  well  as  scrub  typhus  and  Q  fever. Accompanying pulmonary symptoms may result from bacterial pneumonia,  sepsis,  Q  fever  or  tuberculosis.  Rarely,  miliary  tuberculosis may be associated with acute elevation in transaminases, but is more commonly associated with granulomatous hepatitis. Granulomatous hepatitis can be caused by several infectious and noninfectious etiologies, but primary diagnostic considerations should include tuberculosis (see Chapter 39), brucellosis (see Chapter 70) and Q fever (see Chapter  66).  Eosinophilia  may  be  caused  by  a  variety  of  parasitic infections, but eosinophilia in the setting of symptomatic hepatitis or hepatomegaly may suggest schistosomiasis, trichinellosis, capillariasis or fascioliasis (see Chapters 122, 1 15, 107, or 124).

Noninfectious  causes  of  liver  enzyme  abnormalities  include  acute hepatic  injury  from  medications  (Table  4-3)  such  as  isoniazid  or pyrazinamide,  commonly  used  antimycobacterial  drugs,  acetaminophen, or toxins such as alcohol, mushrooms, carbon tetrachloride or aflatoxins.

TABLE 4-2 Etiology of Hepatitis

|                           | Pre-hepatic                               | Hepatic (hepatocellular or intrahepatic cholestatic)                                                                                                   | Post-hepatic                                                                                    |
|---------------------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Infectious                |                                           |                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                 |
| Fecal-oral                |                                           | Hepatitis A virus Hepatitis E virus Typhoid Q fever Brucellosis                                                                                        | Microsporidiosis Cryptosporidiosis Ascariasis                                                   |
| Inhalation                |                                           | Tuberculosis Adenovirus Psittacosis                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                 |
| Water-borne               | Schistosomiasis                           | Leptospirosis                                                                                                                                          | Liver Juke: Fasciola Clonorchis Opisthorchis Ascariasis                                         |
| Parenteral and permucosal |                                           | Hepatitis B virus Hepatitis D virus Hepatitis C virus Syphilis                                                                                         |                                                                                                 |
| Vector-borne              | Malaria Babesiosis Bartonellosis          | Dengue Yellow fever Hemorrhagic fevers: Lassa, Ebola, Marburg, yellow fever, dengue                                                                    |                                                                                                 |
| Saliva                    |                                           | Epstein-Barr virus Cytomegalovirus                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                 |
| Noninfectious             | Hemolysis G6PD deIciency Hemoglobinopathy | Drug reaction Toxins - alcohol, aJatoxins, carbon tetrachloride Immune - primary biliary cirrhosis/primary sclerosing cholangitis Non-Hodgkin lymphoma | Cholangiocarcinoma Gallbladder cancer Pancreas: pancreatic tumor or pancreatitis Cholelithiasis |
| Vascular                  | Ischemic hepatitis Portal vein thrombosis | Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (SOS) Nodular regenerative hyperplasia (NRH) Peliosis                                                                  | Budd-Chiari Cardiac hepatopathy                                                                 |

## CHRONIC LIVER DISEASE

Chronic hepatitis is arbitrarily defined as abnormal liver function tests for more than 6 months. The major consequence of chronic hepatitis is  cirrhosis with its concomitant risk of liver failure and cancer. The most  common cause of  chronic hepatitis  worldwide  is  hepatitis  B virus,  with  an  estimated  400  million  people  currently  chronically infected worldwide. Untreated, about 20-25% of people with chronic HBV  may  die  of  complications  of  cirrhosis  and/or  hepatocellular carcinoma,  and  this  course  may  be  accelerated  by  coexisting  HDV infection. Chronic HCV is also a cause of significant morbidity and mortality worldwide, with an estimated 190 million people chronically infected. While treatments have been developed for each of these viruses,  their  effectiveness  is  not  universal,  and  their  cost  is  often prohibitive.

Schistosomiasis (see Chapter 122) is another major cause of chronic liver disease [9]. Adult schistosome worms live in draining veins of the  intestine  or  urinary  tract.  Eggs  secreted  by  adult  worms  in mesenteric vessels can be flushed into the liver, and become trapped in  presinusoidal  portal  venules,  leading  to  intense  inflammation, granulomas,  and  a  'pipe-stem'  fibrosis.  This  can  result  in  portal hypertension out of proportion to the level of fibrosis and hepatic dysfunction.  Given  the  prevalence  and  geographic  overlap  with chronic viral hepatitis,  alternative causes  of  liver disease  should  be

TABLE 4-3 LFT Patterns with Drugs

| Cholestatic                                                                                                                                     | Hepatocellular                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Amoxicillin/clavulanic acid Anabolic steroids Chlorambucil Chlorpromazine Chlorpropamide Erythromycin Estrogen (oral contraceptives) Tricyclics | Acetaminophen Antiretroviral therapy (ART) Allopurinol Amiodarone Aspirin and nonsteroidal anti- inJammatory drugs (NSAIDs) Carbamazepine Halothane Isoniazid Ketoconazole Nitrofurantoin Phenytoin Propylthiouracil Rifampin Statins Sulfonamides Tetracycline Valproic acid |

considered  when  true  cirrhosis  is  found  in  the  setting  of  chronic schistosomiasis. Moreover, given that each may be clinically silent for years to decades, a high index of suspicion is needed to diagnose these conditions. Early treatment with praziquantel can lead to regression of fibrosis due to schistosomiasis.

Other causes of chronic liver disease leading to hepatic failure include: granulomatous  diseases, metabolic  diseases and  alcoholic liver disease. Systemic infections can be associated with granulomas in the liver. In addition to schistosomiasis, these include: mycobacteriosis, leishmaniasis, histoplasmosis, brucellosis and syphilis. Noninfectious causes include sarcoidosis, lymphoma, primary biliary cirrhosis, and drug reactions. High environmental copper ingestion in children can also lead to cirrhosis (copper-associated childhood cirrhosis or Indian childhood  cirrhosis);  recognition  of  how  to  prevent  and  treat  this entity  has  decreased  the  incidence  of  this  disease.  African  Bantu hemosiderosis is a disease of iron overload similar in manifestations to  hemochromatosis;  the  presumed  genetic  basis  of  this  disease  is currently unknown. It is important to counsel those with chronic liver disease to avoid additional hepatic insults via prevention of exposures to infectious  agents  and  toxins,  as  well  as  provision  of vaccination against hepatitis A and hepatitis B viruses.

## JAUNDICE AND BILIARY OBSTRUCTION

Many tropical diseases may result in cholestasis and jaundice, through varied  mechanisms.  Overload  of  unconjugated  bilirubin  can  occur during  acute  hemolysis  due  to  malaria,  babesiosis,  Oroya  fever (caused by Bartonella bacilliformis ), and hemolytic uremic syndrome caused by E. coli O157:H7 or Shigella dysenteriae , and sepsis related to Clostridium perfringens .  Hemolytic crises  can also complicate hemoglobinopathies and may be precipitated by infections. Jaundice may also be caused by processes that result in impaired conjugation and/ or excretion of bilirubin by the liver. Some tropical diseases may be associated  with  both  hemolysis  and  impaired  excretion  (i.e.  leptospirosis).  Non-obstructive  causes  include  any  causes  of  generalized liver dysfunction (i.e. during fulminant acute hepatitis or subsequent to chronic liver disease/cirrhosis). Obstructive causes include noninfectious causes (gallstones and tumors), helminthic infection (such as those caused by Ascaris lumbricoides . or Clonorchis sinensis and other liver  flukes)  and  certain  protozoa  (such as Cryptosporidium  hominis/ parvum , particularly in those with HIV or other states of immunosuppression).  Any  biliary  obstruction  can  be  complicated  by  bacterial cholangitis. Some of these entities often cause obstruction by mass lesions  (see  below  section)  that  may  also  involve  blockage  of  the pancreatic  duct;  serum  pancreatic  enzymes  and  ultrasound  and/or other imaging may be useful tests to help identify specific etiologies.

## VASCULAR LIVER DISEASE 8see Table 4-29

Vascular  diseases  of  the  liver  are  uncommon  and  include:  BuddChiari syndrome, which is obstruction of the intrahepatic portion of the inferior vena cava or hepatic veins; portal vein thrombosis; sinusoidal obstruction syndrome  (previously termed  veno-occlusive disease);  nodular  regenerative  hyperplasia  and  peliosis  [10].  Other causes  include  ischemic  hepatitis  and  congestive  hepatopathy  as  a result  of  cardiac  failure,  for  example  right  heart  failure  related  to mycobacterial constrictive pericarditis. Usually, these vascular lesions are associated with portal hypertension which precedes hepatic synthetic failure. Doppler ultrasound or contrast CT are useful imaging techniques for delineating the vessels of the liver.

## FOCAL LIVER LESIONS 8Table 4-49

The evaluation of a focal liver lesion may include noninvasive tests, including serology, blood parameters, tumor markers and microbiologic assessment, as well as further imaging with ultrasound, CT or MRI. Biopsy may be required to differentiate lesions; however, in a large study of focal liver lesions, preoperative assessment was correct

| TABLE 4-4           | Focal Liver Lesions                                                             |                                                                                                      |
|---------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                     | Infection                                                                       | Tumor                                                                                                |
| Cystic              | Abscess Pyogenic Amebic Hydatid                                                 | Simple cyst Polycystic liver disease                                                                 |
| Solid               | Tuberculosis Syphilitic gumma Liver Juke: Fasciola Clonorchis Opisthorchis      | Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) Adenoma Fibronodular hyperplasia (FNH) Hemangioma Regenerative nodule |
|                     |                                                                                 | Metastatic disease Lymphoma                                                                          |
| Biliary obstruction | Liver Juke: Fasciola Clonorchis Opisthorchis Microsporidiosis Cryptosporidiosis | Cholangiocarcinoma Gallbladder cancer Pancreas: pancreatic tumor or pancreatitis Gallstone           |

in 221 of the 225 cases (98.2%), suggesting that fine needle aspiration for diagnosis is not necessary in the majority of cases [1 1]. Determining  the  size  and  whether  the  lesion  is  solid  or  cystic  are  useful  in stratifying the diagnostic approach (Table 4-4). As a rule, small lesions ( &lt; 1 cm) are often benign, while larger lesions and those occurring in the  context of chronic  liver disease have  higher  potential for malignancy.

In an individual presenting with a cystic liver lesion associated with right upper quadrant pain and fever, consideration should be given to  differentiating  amebic  from  pyogenic  abscesses.  While  both  are associated with a significant mortality, treatment differs. The typical imaging appearance of a pyogenic abscess is a fluid-filled lesion with surrounding parenchymal edema. However, imaging could not satisfactorily differentiate pyogenic from amebic abscesses in a large series [12]. In this series, multivariate analysis identified pyogenic abscesses to be associated with older age ( &gt; 50 years), pulmonary findings on examination, multiple lesions and negative amebic serology ( &lt; 1:256 IU). The major route of seeding in both is the portal circulation. Pyogenic liver abscesses are commonly polymicrobial, usually caused by mixed enteric facultative and anaerobic species. Klebsiella pneumoniae and Streptococcus  milleri are  common  pathogens  [13]. Focal liver abscesses can also complicate melioidosis (caused by the Gram-negative bacillus Burkholderia pseudomallei ). Melioidosis occurs in Southeast Asia, China and northern Australia populations, particularly in patients with diabetes, alcoholism or renal failure [14].

Pyogenic abscesses require  early percutaneous  drainage  and  broadspectrum  antibiotics.  Studies  do  not  support  a  difference  between intermittent  versus  continuous drainage  of  these  abscesses  [15].  In contrast, amebic abscesses are usually treated medically. Liver abscess is  the most common extraintestinal manifestation of Entamoeba histolytica infection (see Chapter 89), occurring in endemic areas such as Central and South America, West and South Africa, and India [16]. Amebic abscesses may be solitary or multiple, and often occur in the right hepatic lobe (75%). Diagnosis is usually based on detection of antibody in blood, or antigen in stool or hepatic aspirates, as well as response to empiric treatment [17] with metronidazole or its analogs, followed by a luminal amebicide such as paromomycin, iodoquinol or diloxanide furoate to eliminate infection [16]. Drainage, however, should be considered if there is impending rupture or involvement of the pleura or pericardium.

Other cystic lesions of the liver include simple hepatic cysts and cystic hydatid disease caused by Echinococcus granulosus (see Chapter 128) [18]. Hydatid cysts have a typical radiologic appearance which has led to a staging classification based on imaging appearance [19]. Generally, hydatid cysts have thick pericystic walls which may be calcified. The cysts usually have septa and may contain 'daughter' cysts [20]. Unlike abscesses, surrounding liver tissue is normal. AntiE. granulosus antibodies are positive in a majority of cases [19]. Current treatment  usually  involves  albendazole  with  or  without  mechanical drainage or removal.

Primary  malignant  hepatobiliary  tumors  in  the  developing  world often relate to underlying infectious etiologies. Hepatocellular carcinoma  (HCC)  leads  to  over  600,000  deaths  annually  worldwide, usually occurring in the context of chronic liver disease [21]. An estimated 85% of cases are associated with chronic viral hepatitis (HBV and HCV), which currently infects over 500 million people worldwide [22,23]. Levels of HBV viremia correlate with the risk of developing HCC [24], and successful anti-HBV vaccination programs lead to a significant reduction in the incidence of HCC [25]. Other risk factors for HCC include alcohol and aflatoxins, which may in part explain the higher incidence of HCC in West African and Chinese populations without  underlying  HBV-related  cirrhosis  [23].  Diagnosis  usually involves a combination of consistent findings on imaging studies, and elevated alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) levels in the setting of chronic liver disease. Typically, HCCs appear as hypervascular lesions on imaging, a result of neovascularization from the hepatic artery. Approximately 70% of cases are associated with an elevated AFP. In the largest randomized study of ultrasound and AFP screening in over 18,000 Chinese patients,  biannual  screening  reduced  HCC  mortality  by  37%  [26]. However, the benefit of screening in resource-limited settings is controversial [27].

To date, HCC treatment involves either locoregional therapies, including alcohol injection, radiofrequency ablation, or transarterial chemoembolization (TACE), or surgical resection in those with small tumors and sufficient hepatic reserve without portal hypertension. However, overall prognosis of HCC is usually poor. Newer targeted chemotherapies such as sorafenib are emerging, but their current cost precludes use  in  the  resource-limited  settings  [28].  Benign  parenchymal  liver tumors include adenomas, fibronodular hyperplasia, and hemangiomas. Chronic biliary inflammation associated with persistent Salmonella infection of the biliary tract and Clonorchis/Opisthorchis liver flukes has also been associated with gallbladder cancer and cholangiocarcinoma, respectively [29]. Individuals with these entities may usually eventually present with biliary obstruction, with elevation of alkaline phosphatase and GGT with or without jaundice, and biliary dilation on ultrasound, CT or MRCP. ERCP or endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) with cytology can be diagnostic in biliary tract malignancies. Finally, in the context of systemic disease, metastatic malignancy and lymphoma should be considered.

## HIV AND THE LIVER 8Table 4-59

The majority of people infected with HIV live in the lower-income world (see Chapter 27). HIV is associated with a number of specific diseases of the liver related to immunosuppression, immune reconstitution and drug effects. Broadly, the spectrum of liver disease relates to  CD4  count  and  antiretroviral  therapy  (ART)  exposure.  In  areas where ART is available, the burden of disease has shifted from opportunistic  infection  and  malignancy  to  chronic  diseases,  with  liver disease related to viral hepatitis becoming a leading cause of morbidity and mortality [30]. Chronic viral hepatitis and HIV co-infection is associated with reduced spontaneous clearance and accelerated progression of viral hepatitis to cirrhosis, hepatic decompensation and hepatocellular carcinoma [31]. However, in those who do not have access to ART, opportunistic infection and malignancy are still prevalent. Most conditions associated with liver disease are systemic and have  spread  hematogenously  from  other  sites  to  involve  the  liver. These can be stratified by CD4 count, as most serious opportunistic infections  (OIs)  occur  with  severe  immunodeficiency  (CD4 &lt; 100 cells/ μ L).  However,  tuberculosis,  non-Hodgkin  lymphoma  (NHL)

<!-- image -->

| TABLE 4-5 HIV Infection and the Liver   | TABLE 4-5 HIV Infection and the Liver                        | TABLE 4-5 HIV Infection and the Liver          | TABLE 4-5 HIV Infection and the Liver                                |
|-----------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                         | Infection                                                    | Tumor                                          | Other                                                                |
| CD4 < 100 cells/ μ L                    | Mycobacterium avium infection Cryptococcosis Cytomegalovirus | Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) Kaposi sarcoma (KS) |                                                                      |
| CD4 > 200 cells/ μ L                    | Tuberculosis                                                 | Non-Hodgkin lymphoma Kaposi sarcoma            |                                                                      |
| CD4 > 500 cells/ μ L                    | Viral hepatitis (hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus)       | Hepatocellular carcinoma                       | Drug-induced liver injury (DILI) Lipodystrophy Immune reconstitution |

and Kaposi sarcoma (KS) can occur at moderate levels (CD4 &gt; 200 cells/ μ L) of immunodeficiency [32,33]. Of the OIs infecting the liver, Mycobacterium avium complex is the most common. Other infections include Cryptococcus neoformans , Pneumocystis jiroveci , cytomegalovirus and tuberculosis. In particular geographic areas, visceral or disseminated leishmaniasis is also prevalent. AIDS cholangiopathy is associated  with  cryptosporidial  and  microsporidial  infection  in  patients with CD4 counts &lt; 100 cells/ μ L, and can lead to biliary obstruction [34].  While  the  presentation  is  variable,  it  is  usually  a  variation  of cholangitis with diarrhea, which is the result of the intestinal infection with these pathogens.

Following the initiation of ART in individuals with low CD4 T-cell counts ( &lt; 100 cells/ μ L), approximately 10-30% of individuals present with a new opportunistic infection or worsening clinical symptoms of  an  already  established  infection,  termed  immune  reconstitution syndrome [35]. This is of particular relevance  for  those  co-infected with  viral  hepatitis  with  advanced  hepatic  fibrosis,  as  fatal  hepatic flares  have  been  reported  [36].  Finally,  drug-induced  liver  injury (DILI) is commonly associated with ART, and this entity is more likely when there is co-infection with viral hepatitis [37].

## REFERENCES

1. O'Grady JG, Schalm SW, Williams R. Acute liver failure: redefining the syndromes. Lancet 1993,342:273-5.
2. Cardenas  A,  Gines  P.  Portal  hypertension.  Curr  Opin  Gastroenterol  2009, 25:195-201.
3. Kamath PS, Kim WR. The model for end-stage liver disease (MELD). Hepatology 2007,45:797-805.
4. Bravo  AA,  Sheth  SG,  Chopra  S.  Liver  biopsy.  N  Engl  J  Med  2001,344: 495-500.
5. Betz TG. Hepatitis A vaccine versus immune globulin for postexposure prophylaxis. N Engl J Med 2008,358:531.
6. Aggarwal R, Naik S. Epidemiology of hepatitis E: current status. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2009,24:1484-93.
7. Ganem D, Prince AM. Hepatitis B virus infection - natural history and clinical consequences. N Engl J Med 2004,350:1118-29.
8. Lauer  GM,  Walker  BD.  Hepatitis  C  virus  infection.  N  Engl  J  Med  2001, 345:41-52.
9. Gryseels B, Polman K, Clerinx J, Kestens L. Human schistosomiasis. Lancet 2006,368:1106-1 18.
10.  DeLeve LD. Vascular liver diseases. Curr Gastroenterol Rep 2003,5:63-70.
11.  Torzilli G, Minagawa M, Takayama T, et al. Accurate preoperative evaluation of liver mass lesions without fine-needle biopsy. Hepatology 1999,30:889-93.
12.  Lodhi  S,  Sarwari  AR,  Muzammil  M,  et  al.  Features  distinguishing  amoebic from pyogenic liver abscess: a review of 577 adult cases. Trop Med Int Health 2004,9:718-23.
13.  Yang CC, Yen CH, Ho MW, Wang JH. Comparison of pyogenic liver abscess caused  by  nonKlebsiella  pneumoniae and Klebsiella  pneumoniae .  J  Microbiol Immunol Infect 2004,37:176-84.

14.  Currie  BJ,  Fisher  DA,  Howard  DM,  et  al.  Endemic  melioidosis  in  tropical northern Australia: a 10-year prospective study and review of the literature. Clin Infect Dis 2000,31:981-6.
15.  Yu SC, Ho SS, Lau WY, et al. Treatment of pyogenic liver abscess: prospective randomized comparison of catheter drainage and needle aspiration. Hepatology 2004,39:932-8.
16.  Stanley SL Jr. Amoebiasis. Lancet 2003,361:1025-34.
17.  Haque R,  Mollah  NU,  Ali  IK,  et  al.  Diagnosis  of  amebic  liver  abscess  and intestinal infection with the TechLab Entamoeba histolytica II antigen detection and antibody tests. J Clin Microbiol 2000,38:3235-9.
18.  Frider B, Larrieu E, Odriozola M. Long-term outcome of asymptomatic liver hydatidosis. J Hepatol 1999,30:228-31.
19.  McManus  DP,  Zhang  W,  Li  J,  Bartley  PB.  Echinococcosis.  Lancet  2003, 362:1295-304.
20.  Doyle  DJ, Hanbidge AE, O'Malley ME. Imaging of hepatic infections.  Clin Radiol 2006,61:737-48.
21.  Parkin DM, Bray F, Ferlay J, Pisani P. Global cancer statistics, 2002. CA Cancer J Clin 2005,55:74-108.
22.  Wands  JR.  Prevention  of  hepatocellular  carcinoma.  N  Engl  J  Med  2004, 351:1567-70.
23.  Bosch FX, Ribes J, Borras J. Epidemiology of primary liver cancer. Semin Liver Dis 1999,19:271-85.
24.  Chen CJ, Yang HI, Su J, et al. Risk of hepatocellular carcinoma across a biological  gradient  of  serum  hepatitis  B  virus  DNA  level.  JAMA  2006,295: 65-73.
25.  Chang MH, Chen CJ, Lai MS, et al. Universal hepatitis B vaccination in Taiwan and the incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma in children. Taiwan Childhood Hepatoma Study Group. N Engl J Med 1997,336:1855-9.
26.  Zhang BH, Yang BH, Tang ZY. Randomized controlled trial of screening for hepatocellular carcinoma. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 2004,130:417-22.
27.  Danta M, Barnes E, Dusheiko G. The surveillance and diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2005,17:491-6.
28.  Llovet JM, Ricci S, Mazzaferro V, et al. Sorafenib in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med 2008,359:378-90.
29.  Kumar  S.  Infection  as  a  risk  factor  for  gallbladder  cancer.  J  Surg  Oncol 2006,93:633-9.
30.  Bica I, McGovern B, Dhar R, et al. Increasing mortality due to end-stage liver disease in patients with human immunodeficiency virus infection. Clin Infect Dis 2001,32:492-7.
31.  Koziel  MJ,  Peters  MG.  Viral  hepatitis  in  HIV  infection.  N  Engl  J  Med 2007,356:1445-54.
32.  Spano JP, Costagliola D, Katlama C, et al. AIDS-related malignancies: state of the art and therapeutic challenges. J Clin Oncol 2008,26:4834-42.
33.  Engels EA, Pfeiffer RM, Goedert JJ, et al. Trends in cancer risk among people with AIDS in the United States 1980-2002. AIDS 2006,20:1645-54.
34.  Margulis SJ, Honig CL, Soave R, et al. Biliary tract obstruction in the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Ann Intern Med 1986,105:207-10.
35.  Crane M, Matthews G, Lewin SR. Hepatitis virus immune restoration disease of the liver. Curr Opin HIV AIDS 2008,3:446-52.
36.  Crane M, Oliver B, Matthews G, et al. Immunopathogenesis of hepatic flare in HIV/hepatitis B virus (HBV)-coinfected individuals after the initiation of HBV-active antiretroviral therapy. J Infect Dis 2009,199:974-81.
37.  Sulkowski MS, Thomas DL, Chaisson RE, Moore RD. Hepatotoxicity associated with antiretroviral therapy in adults infected with human immunodeficiency  virus  and  the  role  of  hepatitis  C  or  B  virus  infection.  JAMA  2000, 283:74-80.